Censor is a neuroinspired network with 68.35 million parameters that models 11 stages in human visual–affective processing (fig. 1). Table I gives an overview of the parameters and scaling of each stage. The forward pass of the network is summarized by the following equations, where batch size is B and input dimensions are (B, 3, 16, 224, 224): we assume spatial dimensions for input data have been flattened, so the network processes RGB images (B, 3) of size 224 × 224. Early visual preprocessing (e.g., contrast enhancement, edge detection, temporal filtering) is akin to processing in the human retina and lateral geniculate nucleus. After the preprocessing layer, we denote saliency detection as SaliencyDetector.

The saliency map is used to detect those areas of the face that are likely to be important for an emotion. We construct a saliency map using a multi-scale Gaussian pyramid, with four levels and each at a scale two times finer than the preceding level (S1, S2, S3, S4). rPPG computes the cardiac pulse signal from low-level cues such as slight changes in colour due to changes in blood volume in the face. rPPG has the advantage of providing a measure of arousal that does not depend on overt facial movement and therefore can assist in detecting microexpressions even when people are trying to suppress their emotional displays. rPPG was extracted using a chroma-based method that exploits previous work for face affect detection (see De Haan and Jeanne34 for details). Optical flow measures the apparent motion of pixels between frames and, therefore, can be used to capture facial muscle movement. We computed optical flow using the dual TV-L1 algorithm35 implemented in OpenCV; minimising this flow energy functional.

We implemented a fast pathway for scene parsing that builds on the idea of cortical motion processing—the flow of information through brain regions such as the superior colliculus, pulvinar and amygdala, which responds quickly (about 50 ms) to motion but lacks fine spatial resolution. Here, we model this pathway with an accelerated version of ResNet-18 (see methods), which processes raw flow images (as opposed to images from a camera), and gradually downsamples temporal information across stages containing successively deeper convolutional layers (Fig. 1d). The temporal downsampling captures the notion that biologically the pathway processes motion over longer time spans, rather than finer temporal structures. The computational model uses 3D instead of 2D convolutions to process moving scenes.

The route we take is reminiscent of how vision is analysed in cortex—from primary visual cortex (V1) to superior temporal (S) area V2, to striate (S) area V4, to face-selective area fusiform (FFA). In this V1 to V4 to FFA pathway, high spatial-resolution processing first occurs, followed by fine temporal processing that is involved in recognising faces. The Swin Transformer blocks involve attention, where for a given set of tokens the attention is computed locally within each of several windows: within each block, the windows are successively partitioned using different schemes—the standard procedure (known as windowed self-attention, W-MSA) vs a shifted version (SW-MSA) that enables cross-window connections, whilst preserving efficiency. Normalisation and a two-layer feed-forward network with gelu activation separate the operations.

A key component of our model is a gating mechanism that allows fast pathway inputs to have an indirect influence on a slow pathway through spatial attention, as for example the amygdala is thought to do by biasing activity in cortical systems to emotional stimuli (38). We implement such behaviour by encoding how attention should be flexibly allocated in response to facial images, using an attention gating network. The integration of facial inputs from cortical and subcortical pathways that supports the role of the FFA in facial processing (39) is similarly captured by applying SE-gating to the output of concatenated fast and slow pathways, as is expected given the importance of such a network for emphasising face-relevant information.

CASANet models the distinctive onsets, apexes and offsets of microexpressions. The apices—peak expression moments—may be especially informative for classification, and the network has mechanisms to focus attention on them.

G.1 Inverted-Triangle Learnable Spatial Mask

Micro-expressions are typically short and restricted to parts of the face (e.g., the eyes for sadness, the mouth for happiness). We learn a spatial importance mask for each image to ignore irrelevant facial regions. We propose using temporally aggregated CASANet features to compute apex scores in each frame: Expanding temporal information across frames allows us to use long short-term memory (LSTM) networks to model micro-expression dynamics in time. In the architecture we describe, a sparse mixture-of-experts classifies the expression in each frame by independently routing the fused features to different experts, each of which models micro-expressions of different types. Each expert consists of three fully-connected layers with residual connections (Fig. 3). We use a gating network to control the routing from input to the various experts. We employ a noise-robust selection strategy31 that is proven to stably select top experts, and use an auxiliary loss to prevent the experts from collapsing on the same inputs.

Individual differences in faces and expression pose challenges for MER with population data. We address this issue by performing subject-specific adaptation of Censor at test time, by using a residual module that weighs lightly on the original algorithm. The final output is a structured report that, when optionally supplemented with natural language, highlights key micro-expressions. For our evaluation, we used five micro-expression datasets, based on publicly available data (see Methods for details)40.

CASME-II (Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences) provides 247 samples of microexpressions from 26 subjects. Each microexpressions video recording (at 200 fps with 2048×1088 resolution) was annotated with 7 emotion categories (including microexpressions), following the Facial Action Coding System (FACS). This dataset has been used as a benchmark because of its large sample size and annotation standard. SAMM (Spontaneous Actions and Micro-Movements) is another dataset with high-resolution videos showing spontaneous expressions over 13 ethnicities, 32 subjects and 159 microexpressions, which provide annotations for 7 emotion categories, with AU annotation following FACS. It is the most ethnically diverse MER dataset so far, and thus provides a challenge in testing the ability to generalize across facial morphologies.

The Spontaneous Micro-expression Corpus (SMIC-HS)16 includes recordings of 16 subjects capturing spontaneous micro-expressions at 100 frames·s⁻¹ (1280×720). These data are commonly used to compare methods across datasets. The Multimodal Micro-expression Database7 contains micro- and macro-expression recordings for 36 subjects, showing 300 micro-expression and 900 macro-expression samples at 90 frames·s⁻¹, labelled into 7 categories. Joint analysis of micro- and macro-expressions is therefore possible with this dataset. The dataset CAS(ME)3 includes 300 micro-expression samples for which elicitation was carried out in natural contexts (along with the corresponding macro-expression clips with the annotations of used arousal units). In addition, we used a set iMER42 of incremental benchmarks, combining several datasets to assess generalisation across datasets.

B. Implementation Details
B.1 Data Preprocessing

In all experiments, faces were detected using MTCNN face detector (ref. 43) at the beginning of each video, and all frames in a video were cropped based on the detected bounding box, then rescaled to 224 × 224 pixels. For each micro-expression sample, 16 frames uniformly sampled from the micro-expression onset–apex–offset region were used in training; if the length of the sample is less than 16, the last frame was repeated. If the sample is longer than 16 frames, it was subsampled at random for training, and uniformly subsampled for test. Before training, frames from each sample were zero-centred with unit variance according to their statistics in the dataset.

We randomly flipped images horizontally (with prob 0.5), cropped them between 200 and 224 pixels (with bilinear interpolation), jittered the colours (brightness, contrast and saturation jittered by ±20%), scaled them temporally by factors between 0.8 and 1.2.

B.2 Training Configuration

We used AdamW (with weight decay 1×10−4)44 to train the Censor model for 120 epochs with initial learning rate 1×10−4 and a cosine annealing scheduler with warm restarts (T0 = 10, T mult = 2). Training used batch size 16 and gradient clipping by norm 1.0, with automatic mixed precision (16-bit floating point) enabled. The following parameters are used for evaluation.

We use standard LO<sub>SO</sub>O cross-validation and appropriate variants thereof. LO<sub>SO</sub>O cross-validation is carried out using each subject in turn (leading to reasonable results when there are at least 5 samples per subject, e.g., CASME II and SMIC datasets). For smaller data sets such as SAMM, 5-fold cross-validation on subject-independent data splits is used. For 80/20 train/test splits that we use for MMEW and for C<sub>AS</sub>M<sub>3</sub>, we train and test on random subject splits with the 5 different 80/20 splits repeated. For results on imbalanced data, we report accuracy and F1 (weighted and unweighted).

C. Baseline Methods

We compare with the following methods: (i) LBP-TOP, a handcrafted method based on local binary patterns derived from three orthogonal views to represent the spatial–temporal information before deep learning; (ii) OFF-ApexNet³⁹, which learns visual features from optical flow and further classifies frames in the apex video with a shallow CNN; (iii) Multi-scale 3D ResNet²² (2024), a 3D residual network with multi-temporal resolutions for MER; (iv) SelfME⁴⁵ (2024), a self-supervised MER method with contrastive pretraining; (v) GAM-MER¹⁸ (2024), which is an MER method based on graph attention mechanism to learn facial muscle motion patterns; (vi) Hybrid Attention-3DNet¹⁶ (2025), a network with space-time attention in a 3D CNN; (vii) ROI-ArcFace¹⁷ (2025), a method based on face keypoint localization and spatial–temporal feature learning with an additive angular margin loss; (viii) STRNet²¹ (2025), a network designed for spatiotemporal reasoning, which explicitly models temporal structure; (ix) MCCA-VNet⁴⁶ (2024), an video-based MER network with multi-channel cross-attention. All of these methods can be regarded as existing baseline methods. (x) Our dual-pathway MER method, Censor.

C. Ablation Study Design (Planned)

We will assess the contribution of each module to performance in a systematic ablation study in which we test different configurations: models without either the fast-flow pathway (Censor with 3D ResNet-18) or the slow-predictions pathway (Censor with 3D Swin-T for RGB inputs and rPPG prediction in parallel) or both (Censor without amygdala gating or with the FFA module only).

We omit an auxiliary decoder, a personalized radar feature test–time adaptation, and the other variations proposed in Sec. III–IV from the experiment results and give the corresponding models in the form Censor (without those omissions). The full Censor model contains 68.35M parameters. Results with these models and their training/inference times will be reported in our experiments.

F. Limitations and Future Work

Limited public data. The evaluations presented here rely on publicly available benchmark data sets that require agreements from the data owners; our experiments wait for availability of such data. 2. Large scale. Censor has 68.35M parameters and is thus at present unlikely to be directly applicable to real-time inference on resource-constrained devices or other limited-data environments, possibly requiring further training with new small-scale data or adaptation techniques. 3. Temporal window. We have limited a model to 16-frame sequences. Other inference tasks may require models with larger temporal windows. 4. Single face. Our model assumes a single person with their face centered in the video; this model may not capture appearance changes due to multiple persons, occlusions, or extreme poses in a scene. Further experiments to confirm our reported results are currently under way.

G. Discussion (Preliminary)

We envisage that a system modelled on the architecture of the visual systems that process motion and scene structure separately (fast and slow motion vision) might perform better than current approaches. We plan to test this hypothesis experimentally and report results elsewhere.

We present Censor, a biomimetic architecture that models the known neural pathways involved in micro-expression processing in the human fusiform–amygdala system, incorporating pathways for processing optical flow (slow—modeling the subcortical pathway) and RGB + rPPG (fast—corticosteric pathway). Our proposed pathway building blocks include attention as inspired by the amygdala, FFA fusion, CASANet spatiotemporal attention, and bidirectional cross-attention for emotion classification, a fast/BiLSTM-based AU decoder, and gating by a mixture of experts using noisy top-2 outputs, together with a training time/personalization module by residual adapters. Extensive experiments and ablation studies will be performed on four datasets (CASME II, SAMM, SMIC and CAS(ME)2) to evaluate our architecture in comparison with recent methods, to show its competitive performance and understand the function of each component. We will also test the generalizability across datasets.

We acknowledge some limitations of our work, which will likely restrict its impact. Studying such a model in practice might be more challenging for reasons of data availability and computational expense, and theoretical evaluation against benchmarks on real-world data is desirable. We believe that our study nonetheless provides motivation for research into more practical biomimetic approaches to recognition of microexpressions. Potential further work includes building self-supervised models that do not need large annotated datasets, developing approaches that can be deployed on resource-constrained devices, improving robustness to more than one person and occlusion, combining with audio/physiological signals and using learning methods that make use of accumulated training over time.